BERLIN—Germany’s political parties on Monday began what could be a monthslong bargaining process to form the next government, with two smaller parties in a position to decide who will succeed Angela Merkel as chancellor. Sunday’s election marked a leftward shift for the country, with the center-left Social Democratic Party, or SPD, coming first and the Greens scoring strong gains. But together they don’t hold enough seats in parliament to form a government and would need to bring in the pro-market Free Democratic Party as a third partner, forcing them to dilute their agenda. Other constellations are arithmetically possible, some of them involving the defeated conservatives, complicating talks. Whatever the shape of the next government, it will likely be broadly centrist—like the Merkel-led left-right alliance that preceded it—because many of the partners’ more radical or controversial proposals could cancel each other out. It is also likely to have a strong focus on measures to combat climate change, which all four parties highlighted in their campaigns and opinion polls show is the dominant concern for German voters. Such a focus could have far-reaching implications for an economy where manufacturing, especially car making, plays an outsize role. Yet the negotiations to get there could take months. And for the first time they will hinge on the Greens and the FDP, Germany’s new kingmakers. The two parties said on Sunday that they would talk to each other before entering negotiations with the bigger conservative bloc and the SPD. The center-left Greens stand for climate policies and social justice while the FDP is a pro-business group that has called for tax cuts and a smaller state. While they both qualify as centrist parties, their platforms have little overlap. Courting them are Olaf Scholz, the SPD candidate who secured a narrow victory with 25.7% of the vote, and Armin Laschet, the conservative candidate who delivered his party’s worst-ever result of 24.1%. Both of their parties would have enough seats to form a three-way coalition with the Greens and the FDP.